# theonlygamethatmatters


https://github.com/the-legend-of-lia/theonlygamethatmatters

This is my final project for my CCS ethics class.  I'm quite excited by visual novel and choose-your-own-adventure type games: I definitely read quite a few books like that and liked Oregon Trail growing up, and enjoyed playing games in recent years like Hatoful Boyfriend, Doki Doki Literature Club, and Dead Wishes.  I also think that VR/AR is a really exciting medium to take this kind of interactive storytelling to a whole other level, which really redefines LARPing (Live Action Role Playing) like Niantic's Pokemon Go and Harry Potter games.  Earlier this year, I went to AthenaHacks and heard a really awesome keynote by Morgan Mercer, the founder and CEO of a startup called Vantage Point, which seeks to use VR/AR technology to help anti-sexual harrassment and soft skills training.

I wanted to experiment with this idea of immersing someone in the position of having to make decisions on ethical dilemmas.  I sometimes wonder if any individual who considers themselves a moral and upright human being, is so due to their own internal set of morals and values, or just due to circumstance.  If you put someone in an ethically questionable situation they have never experienced, what would they do?  Likewise, if you put someone in a simulation of an ethically questionable scenario relating to an ethical violation they have committed in the past, do they feel guilt or become more self-aware of their choices?

I chose the story of describing, in second person perspective, someone in front of a laptop, likely by themselves, taking an online coding interview exam.  I've never taken one myself, but I've seen people take them and found it very interesting how some people can and can't resist the temptation to cheat.  It seems extremely easy to look up coding exam questions online discretely or to ask a friend for help.  It's odd to me that computer science majors at UCSB are required to take an ethics course, but other engineering majors aren't.  I do think that the processes of being judged impersonally by an automatic grading system, of applying to jobs with very little human interaction and consideration on the part of prospective employers, of basing to some degree self-worth on finding quick solutions to formulaic and often re-used problems is a degrading process that programmers endure in particular.  As you can probably tell, I have a poor opinion of online coding interviews - I have no idea of their effectiveness, but I am quite certain that incentivizing job applicants to memorize solutions to common coding interview problems is completely counterproductive to having programmers who value writing code carefully (there are consequences for hasty and unsafe code) and out-of-the-box thinking.  I have heard stories of people who are only good at the interview, and after being hired, turn out to be significantly underqualified.  Many job applicants likely also realize that cheating on an online coding exam is way easier than cheating, say, in university; furthermore, the payoff is much higher and the consequences are far lower.  I am curious to see what a fair, useful, meaningful, relevant to the job, and inclusive online coding interview exam looks like, but for the time being I don't know of any such exam that meets all or most of these criteria.

The story starts off with two multiple-choice questions to get you into the mood of test-taking.  These questions are esoteric so that you feel disillusioned right after the bat.  A special Easter egg for those who went to public middle or high school in California is that the wording of the first sentence is very close to that of the Pacer test, a standardizaed running test used in California public schools' P.E. classes.  The 3rd question is the first ethical decision: should you look up an answer online, when you're not supposed to, but you know where it is and that there's little chance of being caught?  It's given as a quicktime event: in video games, this is when you have a very short time limit to react and make important decisions quickly.  I wanted to add this because I saw gameplay of Until Dawn, a horror roleplaying game in which sometimes if you don't press a certain button immediately when prompted, consequences ensue.  I guess quicktime events are, as a very coarse analogy, reverse jumpscares where it's you who pounces upon your controller quickly.  In the simulation, if you don't press a button in time to look up the answer online, you fail the test because you scored beneath others, including others who did look up the answer online.  If you do look it up, you then have to make a second ethical decision: your friend texts you that she completed her exam and wants to help you; should you take her up on that offer?  Here, the user needs to explicitly type in a yes or no, making the user feel more involved in the decision.  I was thinking of the trolley problem here: if you flip a switch to redirect a trolley so that 1 person dies instead of 5, is the murder you committed justified?  Likewise, in the simulation the user needs to quickly type in yes to cheat, which requires more active user input than the first ethical dilemma of mashing any button.  I had originally wanted the simulation to have endings based on the correctness of your answers and a (pseudo)random number generator that determines whether each cheating attempt was successful.  I chose to instead utilize time spent on this project on further developing the user input mechanic of the code, because I felt it more immersive and ethically interesting to incorporate quicktime events and user dialogue into the gameplay.

Thus concludes this proof of concept of a choose-your-own-adventure text-based console game.  I don't forsee continuing this project, mainly because I don't have any firsthand experience of what coding interview are like, and because my in-class demonstration of this project fulfilled its purpose of raising the issue of unfairness of and cheating in online coding interview exams to the class that is a majority Computing majors.
